.TH M4BMAKER 1 "March 2026" "m4bmaker 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
m4bmaker \- convert a directory of audio files into a single .m4b audiobook
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B m4bmaker
[\fIDIRECTORY\fR]
[\fB\-o\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB\-O\fR \fIDIR\fR]
[\fB\-\-flat\fR]
[\fB\-t\fR \fITITLE\fR]
[\fB\-a\fR \fIAUTHOR\fR]
[\fB\-n\fR \fINARRATOR\fR]
[\fB\-g\fR \fIGENRE\fR]
[\fB\-c\fR \fIIMAGE\fR]
[\fB\-b\fR \fIBITRATE\fR]
[\fB\-\-stereo\fR]
[\fB\-\-no\-prompt\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B m4bmaker
scans \fIDIRECTORY\fR for audio files (MP3, M4A, AAC, FLAC, WAV, OGG),
sorts them in natural order, builds chapter markers from their durations
using \fBffprobe\fR(1), and encodes everything into a single
\fI.m4b\fR audiobook file using \fBffmpeg\fR(1).
.PP
Metadata (title, author, narrator) is read from the first audio file via
\fBmutagen\fR. Any missing fields are either supplied via command-line flags
or prompted interactively. Pass \fB\-\-no\-prompt\fR to disable interactive
prompts and fail immediately if required metadata is absent.
.PP
Cover art is auto-detected from image files in \fIDIRECTORY\fR; when multiple
candidates exist the one with the largest pixel area is chosen.
Use \fB\-c\fR to specify a cover image path explicitly.
.PP
After probing, a chapter preview table is printed showing the number, start
time, and title of each chapter. In interactive mode you are then asked whether
to rename any titles before encoding begins. Press Enter to keep a title or
type a replacement. Pass \fB\-\-no\-prompt\fR to suppress the table and skip
the rename step.
.PP
By default the output file is written to
\fI<Author>/<Title>/<Author> \- <Title>.m4b\fR relative to the current working
directory. Use \fB\-O\fR to choose a different base directory or \fB\-\-flat\fR
to skip the \fIAuthor/Title/\fR nesting. Use \fB\-o\fR to specify an exact path.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B DIRECTORY
Directory containing the audio files.
Defaults to the current working directory.
Directory containing the audio files.
Defaults to the current working directory.
.TP
\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-\-output\fR \fIPATH\fR
Exact output \fI.m4b\fR file path.
Overrides the organized \fIAuthor/Title/\fR layout entirely.
.TP
\fB\-O\fR, \fB\-\-output\-dir\fR \fIDIR\fR
Base directory for the organized output layout.
Defaults to the current working directory.
Ignored when \fB\-o\fR is given.
.TP
.B \-\-flat
Write the \fI.m4b\fR directly into the output directory without creating
\fIAuthor/Title/\fR subdirectories.
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-title\fR \fITITLE\fR
Book title. Overrides tag extraction and skips the interactive title prompt.
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-author\fR \fIAUTHOR\fR
Author name. Overrides tag extraction and skips the interactive author prompt.
.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-narrator\fR \fINARRATOR\fR
Narrator name. Overrides tag extraction and skips the interactive narrator prompt.
.TP
\fB\-g\fR, \fB\-\-genre\fR \fIGENRE\fR
Genre tag embedded in the \fI.m4b\fR.
Default: \fBAudiobook\fR.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-cover\fR \fIIMAGE\fR
Path to a cover image (\fI.jpg\fR, \fI.jpeg\fR, or \fI.png\fR).
Bypasses automatic cover detection.
The file must exist; an error is raised if it does not.
.TP
\fB\-b\fR, \fB\-\-bitrate\fR \fIBITRATE\fR
Audio bitrate passed to \fBffmpeg\fR as \fI\-b:a\fR.
Default: \fB96k\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-stereo
Encode in stereo (2 channels). Default is mono (1 channel).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-prompt
Disable all interactive prompts.
Missing required metadata (title, author, narrator) will cause an immediate
error exit with a descriptive message.
Combine with \fB\-t\fR, \fB\-a\fR, and \fB\-n\fR for fully non-interactive
batch processing.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Simplest usage — process current directory interactively:
.B m4bmaker
.TP
Specify directory, supply metadata up front:
.B m4bmaker /audiobooks/Dune \-t \(aqDune\(aq \-a \(aqFrank Herbert\(aq \-n \(aqScott Brick\(aq
.TP
Stereo output at 128 kbps:
.B m4bmaker /books/Dune \-\-bitrate 128k \-\-stereo
.TP
Custom output path:
.B m4bmaker /books/Dune \-o ~/Desktop/Dune.m4b
.TP
Fully non-interactive (suitable for scripts and Docker):
.B m4bmaker /books/Dune \-t Dune \-a \(aqFrank Herbert\(aq \-n \(aqScott Brick\(aq \-\-no\-prompt
.SH FILES
.TP
.I <Author>/<Title>/<Author> \- <Title>.m4b
Default output path (relative to output\-dir) when title and author are both known.
.TP
.I <Author> \- <Title>.m4b
Output path when \fB\-\-flat\fR is used and metadata is available.
.TP
.I audiobook.m4b
Fallback output filename when title is unavailable.
.TP
.I /tmp/m4bmaker_*/ffmetadata.txt
Temporary FFMETADATA file holding chapter timestamps; removed after encoding.
.TP
.I /tmp/m4bmaker_*/concat.txt
Temporary ffmpeg concat demuxer input list; removed after encoding.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
.TP
.B ffmpeg >= 6.0
Required for encoding. Must be on \fIPATH\fR.
Install on macOS: \fBbrew install ffmpeg\fR
Install on Debian/Ubuntu: \fBapt-get install ffmpeg\fR
.TP
.B ffprobe >= 6.0
Bundled with ffmpeg. Used to probe audio file durations.
.TP
.B Python >= 3.11
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Error. A descriptive message is printed to \fIstderr\fR.
Common causes: ffmpeg not found, no audio files in directory, missing required
metadata with \fB\-\-no\-prompt\fR, or an ffmpeg encoding failure.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at \fIhttps://github.com/sageframe-no-kaji/m4bmaker/issues\fR
.SH AUTHOR
sageframe-no-kaji <https://github.com/sageframe-no-kaji>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ffmpeg (1),
.BR ffprobe (1)
